                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              INEQUALITY AT WORK:
                 THE EFFECT OF PEER SALARIES ON JOB SATISFACTION

                                             David Card
                                            Alexandre Mas
                                            Enrico Moretti
                                            Emmanuel Saez

                                         Working Paper 16396
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w16396


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2010




We are grateful to Stefano Dellavigna, Ray Fisman, Kevin Hallock, Lawrence Katz, Andrew Oswald,
and numerous seminar participants for many helpful comments. We thank the Princeton Survey Research
Center, particularly Edward Freeland and Naila Rahman for their assistance in implementing the surveys.
We are grateful to the Center for Equitable Growth at UC Berkeley and the Industrial Relations Section
at Princeton University for research support. This paper reflects solely the views of the authors and
not necessarily the views of the institutions they belong to, nor those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2010 by David Card, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Inequality at Work: The Effect of Peer Salaries on Job Satisfaction
David Card, Alexandre Mas, Enrico Moretti, and Emmanuel Saez
NBER Working Paper No. 16396
September 2010, Revised April 2011
JEL No. J0

                                           ABSTRACT

We use a simple theoretical framework and a randomized manipulation of access to information on
peers' wages to provide new evidence on the effects of relative pay on individual job satisfaction and
job search intentions. A randomly chosen subset of employees of the University of California (UC)
was informed about a new website listing the pay of University employees. All employees were then
surveyed about their job satisfaction and job search intentions. Our information treatment doubles
the fraction of employees using the website, with the vast majority of new users accessing data on
the pay of colleagues in their own department. We find an asymmetric response to the information
treatment: workers with salaries below the median for their pay unit and occupation report lower pay
and job satisfaction, while those earning above the median report no higher satisfaction. Likewise,
below-median earners report a significant increase in the likelihood of looking for a new job, while
above-median earners are unaffected. Our findings suggest that job satisfaction depends directly on
relative pay comparisons, and that this relationship is non-linear.


David Card                                        Enrico Moretti
Department of Economics                           University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall, #3880                             Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley                549 Evans Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                           Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                          and NBER
card@econ.berkeley.edu                            moretti@econ.berkeley.edu

Alexandre Mas                                     Emmanuel Saez
Industrial Relations Section                      Department of Economics
Firestone Library                                 University of California, Berkeley
Princeton University                              549 Evans Hall #3880
Princeton, NJ 08544                               Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                          and NBER
amas@princeton.edu                                saez@econ.berkeley.edu
1         Introduction
Economists have long been interested in the possibility that individuals care about both their
absolute income and their income relative to others.1 Relative income concerns have important
implications for microeconomic and macroeconomic policy,2 and for understanding the impact of
income inequality.3 Recent studies have documented a systematic correlation between measures
of relative income and reported job satisfaction (e.g., Clark and Oswald, 1996), happiness (e.g.,
Luttmer, 2005 and Solnick and Hemenway 1998), health and longevity (e.g., Marmot, 2004),
and reward-related brain activity (e.g., Fliessbach et al. 2007).4 Despite confirmatory evidence
from laboratory experiments (e.g., Fehr and Schmidt, 1999), the interpretation of the empiri-
cal evidence is not always straightforward. Relative pay effects pose a daunting challenge for
research design, since credible identification hinges on the ability to isolate exogenous variation
in the pay of the relevant peer group.
        In this paper we propose and implement a new strategy for evaluating the effect of relative
pay comparisons, based on a randomized manipulation of access to information on co-workers’
wages.5 Following a court decision on California’s “right to know” law, the Sacramento Bee
newspaper established a website (www.sacbee.com/statepay) in early 2008 that made it possible
to search for the salary of any state employee, including faculty and staff at the University of
California. In the months after this website was launched we contacted a random subset of
employees at three UC campuses, informing them about the existence of the site.6 A few days
    1
     Early classical references are Smith (1759) and Veblen (1899). Modern formal analysis began with Duesen-
berry’s (1949) relative income model of consumption. Easterlin (1974) used this model to explain the weak link
between national income growth and happiness. Hamermesh (1975) presents a seminal analysis of the effect of
relative pay on worker effort. Akerlof and Yellen (1990) provide an extensive review of the literature (mostly
outside economics) on the impact of relative pay comparisons.
   2
     For example, Boskin and Sheshinski (1978) show how optimal taxation is affected by relative income concerns.
More recently, Grossman and Helpman (2007) develop the implications of relative wage concerns for the optimal
extent of off-shoring. Fuhrer and Moore (1995) introduce relative wage concerns in an overlapping contract
macro wage model.
   3
     Most of the work on inequality has focused on the explanations for the rise in earnings inequality in recent
decades (see reviews by Katz and Autor, 1999 and Acemoglu and Autor, 2011). However, there is less work on
the question of why inequality per se is a matter of public concern.
   4
     There are also studies that have concluded a more important role for absolute income than relative income,
for example, Stevenson and Wolfers (2008). Kuhn et al. (2011) find that people do not experience reduced
happiness when their neighbors win the lottery.
   5
     A number of recent empirical studies in behavioral economics have used similar methods that manipulate
information–rather than the underlying economic parameters–to uncover the effects of various policies. See
Hastings and Weinstein (2009) on school quality, Jensen (2010) on returns to education in developing countries;
Chetty, Looney, and Kroft (2009) on sales taxes, Chetty and Saez (2009) on the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
Kling et al. (2008) on Medicare prescription drug plans.
   6
     Initially the website was relatively unknown. Even as late as June 2009, when we conducted the last of
later we surveyed all campus employees to elicit information about their use of the Sacramento
Bee website, their pay and job satisfaction, and their job search intentions. We compare the
answers from workers in the treatment group (who were informed of the site) and the control
group (who were not). We use administrative salary data matched to the survey responses
to compare the effects of the information treatment on individuals who were earning above or
below the median pay in their unit and occupation, and estimate models that allow the response
to treatment to depend on an individual’s salary relative to the median for his or her unit and
occupation. Throughout our analysis we define peers as co-workers in the same occupation
group (faculty vs. staff) and the same unit (i.e., department or school) within the University.
    Theoretically there are two broad reasons why information on peer salaries may affect work-
ers’ utilities. Much of the existing relative pay literature assumes that workers’ preferences
depend directly on their salary relative to their peers’. Alternatively, workers may have no
direct concern about co-workers’ pay but may use peer wages to help predict their own future
pay, as in the “tunnel effect” of Hirschman and Rothschild (1973).7 These models have different
predictions on how information on co-worker salary affects utility.
    In the relative utility model, we assume that individuals value their position relative to
co-workers in the same pay unit and occupation, and that in the absence of external informa-
